**Preface.** The code of this blog posting will only work with the
latest `development`-branch of the `oce` source.

# Introduction

The `section` dataset from `oce` provides a good example of a dataset
containing flags.

# Methods

    library(oce)

    ## Loading required package: gsw

    data(section)
    Sflag <- section[["salinityFlag"]]

A good first step is to see what flags are being used

    table(Sflag)

    ## Sflag
    ##    2    3    4 
    ## 2298  440  103

This dataset uses the WHP convention for flags (see `?section`), in
which a flag value of 2 is used to indicate data considered to be
acceptable. Thus, the table indicates that only 3/4 of the salinity
measurements are considered to be acceptable. This makes this a good
dataset to illustrate the handling of flags.

First, extract some relevant data.

    S <- section[["salinity"]]
    T <- section[["temperature"]]
    theta <- section[["theta"]]
    p <- section[["pressure"]]
    Sflag <- section[["salinityFlag"]]
    lon <- section[["longitude"]]
    lat <- section[["latitude"]]

Next, plot salinity flag vs salinity

    plot(S, Sflag, pch = Sflag - 1)

![](/dek_blog/docs/assets/images/2016-04-10-flags_files/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)

This suggests that, apart from one distinct outlier at a salinity of 26,
the salinities of bad data are generally in the range of the salinities
of good data. Next, examine temperature and salinity together.

    plotTS(as.ctd(S, T, p, longitude = lon, latitude = lat), pch = Sflag - 1)

![](/dek_blog/docs/assets/images/2016-04-10-flags_files/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)

The last two plots suggest that one of the points marked as being bad
(flag=4) is distinctly anomalous compared with all the other data. A
detailed analysis could be made of that point (e.g. first isolate the
station, then plot it in detail) but time may be better spent simply
focussing on data that have been assessed as being reasonable during the
data-archiving process.

    ok <- Sflag == 2
    plotTS(as.ctd(S[ok], T[ok], p[ok], longitude = lon[ok], latitude = lat[ok]))

![](/dek_blog/docs/assets/images/2016-04-10-flags_files/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png)

Another approach is to use `handleFlags()` to select the good data

    section2 <- handleFlags(section)
    plotTS(section2)

![](/dek_blog/docs/assets/images/2016-04-10-flags_files/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)
where we have used the fact that `plotTS` can recognize section objects.
The use of `handleFlags()` is also recommended because it carries over
to other types of plots, e.g. a salinity section. For example, a
salinity section of all the data is produced as follows. The top row
shows the original section, and the bottom one shows the result after
using `handleFlags()`. Note that the top row has quite a few isolated
points that do not fit the pattern, as revealed by small closed contours
on those plots and blue blobs on the images. Also note that the overall
pattern is changed in these plots, because the bad data are controlling
the contour/image scale ranges.

    par(mfrow = c(2, 2))
    plot(section, which = "salinity")
    plot(section, which = "salinity", ztype = "image", zcol = oceColorsJet)
    plot(section2, which = "salinity")
    plot(section2, which = "salinity", ztype = "image", zcol = oceColorsJet)

![](/dek_blog/docs/assets/images/2016-04-10-flags_files/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png)

# Exercises

1.  Find which station has the very low salinity, and examine that
    station in more detail.
2.  Try as above, but only discarding data with `salinityFlag==4`, which
    are known to be bad (i.e. retain both acceptable and questionable
    data).
3.  Continue step 2, with other types of analysis (e.g. examine spatial
    dependence).
4.  Look online for the source of the `section` dataset, to find out
    more about how the data-quality flags were assigned.
